How do you feel right now?
Are you overwhelmed or stressed?
Do you feel happy or relaxed?
Were you aware of that emotion before I asked the question?
Those with high self-awareness
frequently check in with themselves
to evaluate their emotional state.
They can recognize and label their feelings,
know why they're experiencing those emotions,
and can understand how those feelings
influence their behavior and impact others.
It's an important skill.
So let's take a look at the three types of self-awareness,
why self-awareness is so necessary,
and how you can you can develop the skill.
There are three types of self-awareness.
First, there's emotional self-awareness,
which is about being aware of your emotions.
You notice how you're feeling,
and you can recognize how that's influencing
your thoughts, actions, and performance.
Second, there's accurate self-assessment,
which is the ability to understand your emotional strengths,
weaknesses, and limitations.
For example, you might know
that you tend to yell when frustrated.
Finally there's self-confidence,
which comes from knowing yourself
and your emotional tendencies.
Those with high self-confidence
don't let unpredictable events rattle them.
Emotions can be overwhelming.
And without strong self-awareness,
they can unintentionally control our decisions,
influence our actions,
and negatively affect our performance.
Let's take a look at those downsides.
The first downside of low self-awareness
is that you might be prone to emotional outbursts.
That's because if you push your feelings down,
you'll only bottle them up.
And then it only takes one thing to send you off the edge.
Second, without strong self-awareness,
you might be prone to impulsive decisions.
Rather than exploring your emotions
or thinking things through,
you'll take immediate action.
For example, if you're excited,
you might let that enthusiasm get in the way
of logical reasoning.
Third, if you're not aware of your emotions
and their influence,
you might be prone to unpredictable behavior.
Thus allowing your emotions to run you,
rather than the other way around.
For example, you might be kind to others
when you're in a good mood,
and lash out at people when you're upset.
So how can you improve your self-awareness?
Here are some tips you can follow.
The first tip for improving your self-awareness
is to feel and accept your emotions.
Focus on them, give them names,
and let them run their course.
Regularly ask yourself, how do I feel right now?
And why am I choosing that label?
Second, keep a reflective journal.
At the end of the day, write down what happened,
how those events made you feel, and how you reacted.
That will allow you to identify your emotional triggers
and spot patterns.
Third, notice your physical reactions.
We often store emotions in our body.
So make a habit of performing regular body scans
when you're relaxed, stressed,
or feeling any other type of emotion.
Fourth, reflect with what questions.
Try to figure out what causes strong emotions for you.
For example, after a big event you might ask,
what about that experience made me nervous?
Or what did this situation
have in common with past experiences?
Finally, seek regular feedback.
To understand more about yourself,
it's also important to see how others view you.
For example, you might think you're assertive,
while others may see that, your behavior, as bullying.
So get second opinions.
Remember these tips and keep practicing.
Make a commitment to recognizing how you're feeling,
and how those feelings are influencing others.
And you can cultivate greater self-awareness.